PentaHarp hype is rising and with half the world still waiting for it to even hit their local distributers there's a thirst for knowledge, not least amongst one of the key target groups, guitar players who want to incorporate harmonica in to their sound and have heard that this is the best way to do it.

In this video we'll see exactly how much more intuitive and less technical it is to play blues and minor pentatonic melodies on the PentaHarp than on a standard Richter tuned harp and then at the end I'll tell you how you can get your hands on a brand new PentaHarp courtesy of Hohner themselves and their generous UK distributers Sutherland Trading. This offer is open to all global participants but if you happen to win and live in one of the many regions where the PentaHarp is still not available then you'll have the only PentaHarp for miles around for weeks or even months before anyone else.

We're going to be using Harp Guru for this lesson. As a guitar player you might never have heard of Harp Guru, and you might have never seen even a non-interactive version
of the layout charts that Harp Guru has taken to the next level. But as a guitar player you probably do understand the power of visualisation so let's start with a quick
orientation of what we're' looking at.

Every hole on a harmonica has 2 reeds. A blow reed and a draw reed. Those reeds are represented here on the harpface as the cells inside this grey box. We have 10 holes on the
harmonica so we have 10 pairs of holes inside this grey box. So if you blow on hole 1 you will hear a C, and if you draw (which is what we call inhaling) then you will hear a D#, otherwise known as Eb. You can see that these notes are colour coded as Green and Orange to represent the root and 3b, and if  we repeat this blow and draw pattern on holes 2 & 3, we get F which is the the 4th in purple, Gb which is the 5b in dark blue, G which is the 5th in sky blue and Bb which is the 7b in pink, making the blues scale. The notes above and below the grey box can only be played with special techniques called bending and overblowing. These are techniques we can use to take all harmonicas beyond their primary design focus. But when the designed focus fits your needs, then this is the harmonica at it's kindest and easiest to play.

In the Hohner official PentaHarp for guitarists video (link in the description) Payton Taylor & TJ Watson give a great account of their desire to *just be able to play in the box* to go along with the guitar they were playing and the frustration they felt with how unintuitive it is to do that on a regular Richter tuned harp.

Well we can see that playing in the box looks easy enough on the PentaHarp, but how much easier is it than on a regular Richter tuned harp. Let's take a look.

This is a standard Richter tuned harmonica, playing the blues scale the way it most commonly is, and you can see immediately what they're talking about. The first thing you'll notice is that there is way more variance in breathing pattern. The breathing pattern you play in this octave is very different from the pattern you play in this octave.

You can also see that there are other notes which you need to jump over. Some of them could sound great, like the 2 or even the 6 depending on the context, but this 3 probably isn't going to fit if you're in a minor context and the point is that these players just wanted to play in the box with that blues scale and minor pentatonic with minimum effort. The pentaharp is giving us a much more regular pattern and "no wrong notes". For someone who just wants to let loose that's very helpful.

The next thing is you can see how many of the notes of the blues scale fall outside the home row. That means that you need those special techniques to play these notes. This is the *most common way* to play this scale on a standard harmonica. It's not easy. It has it's own benefits, but being easy is not one of them.

And there's more. You see how down here the blow reed is always lower than the draw reed (6 is lower than 7b, 1 is lower than 2), but up here the blow reed is *higher* than the draw reed (4 is higher than 3, 6 is higher than 5). That means that playing at the top of the harmonica is different in many ways to playing lower down. Notice down here we've got two identical notes right next to each other too. All of this stuff is the result of wonderful engineering, it's fascinating to understand and amazingly rich in what it can produce. But it's not easy!

So without a doubt, if you want to play in the box like Payton & TJ, that's how much easier it is to do it on the PentaHarp. And if you're now sold or you just like fee stuff then let's talk giveaways. Hohner and their uk distributor Sutherland Trading are offering a free PentaHarp to one lucky winner. All you need to do is drop a comment on this or the accompanying Harp Guru pentaharp video's with your thoughts. Check out the other video's to increase your chances. Global entrants are welcome, the competition closes on January 15th and you might even get to choose the key of your prize.


---------

In the previous video we showed you why the PentaHarp is so much easier for playing blues and minor pentatonic melodies than the standard Richter tuned harp, and in this video we'll be keeping it simple and showing you some tips for getting the most out the PentaHarp at this most easiest of levels, and again we're giving away one PentaHarp to one lucky winner courtesy of Hohner and their genrous UK distributers Sutherland Trading. So if you want to get the most out of your PentaHarp, or you just want in on that giveaway then keep watching.

We'll be using Harp Guru again to give you the clearest view on things. If you've not seen Harp Guru before then do check out the previous PentaHarp video in the description to see why one 5 star reviewer of Harp Guru said they "reference it just about every time I practice", "whether you are a beginner [..] or getting deep in to music theory, Harp Guru is the app".

So here we are again with the Cminor pentaharp showing the C blues scale, and you may be aware that if we remove the 5b from the blues scale we are left with the minor pentatonic. So our first tip is that if you want the pure minor pentatonic sound without that 5b, you just have to remove that 2 hole draw, the 5 hole draw and the 8 hole draw from your breathing pattern. That's just 3 holes across the whole length of the harp, and when you see the octaves divided like this it's clear that with a little practice this should be quite easy to achieve.

The next tip considers what you can do around chord changes to help add interest to your solos. Again, very simple, we're just going to rely on some understanding of the function of each chord change. Let's consider the very popular 12 bar blues which uses the 1, 4 & 5 chords.

Playing in the key of C, the 1 chord is C, the 4 chord is F & the 5 chord is G and those of course match up to the root, 4th and 5th scale degrees we see here. Knowing exactly what scale degree you are playing at any one time is a great ability to have, and working with Harp Guru to build a good internal model of the harp can supercharge that for you, especially on the PentaHarp where the layout is so simple. Keeping things really simple though, tip number 2 is to at least be aware of where your chord roots are and emphasise the chord root note in your solos. So during a twelve bar blues we can add a lot to a simple riff, just by emphasising the 4th scale degree when we get to the 4 chord and emphasising the 5th scale degree when you get to the 5 chord as I'm trying to demonstrate in the background now.

That works great for a chord progression with 4 & 5 chords in it. And you can use Harp Guru to where your root note would be for any other chord changes. Well our 2 other most common chord changes are probably the 6 chord and the 2 chord aren't they, and we can see on Harp Guru that to play the root note of the 6 chord or the 2 chord is going to require that we bend down from the 7b for the 6, and down from the 3b for the 2. Bending certainly isn't a simple technique. It's not exceptionally difficult, but we're trying to keep things really simple here, so let's try something else.

Let's imagine that we're no longer playing in C, we're now playing in Eb. We can play Eb on our C harmonica, it's the 1 draw. Let's see what happens if we start using the Eb as our root note. This is what's called positional playing. It can sometimes come across as confusing, because it has magical properties. In this case it means that when we play all of the same notes we were playing before, but this time using the Eb as the root note on 1 draw, now we will be playing a major pentatonic as Harp Guru is letting us know here.

Looking back at the harpface we can see that we are still playing C, Eb, F, G & Bb, but now the Eb is the root note and Eb, F, G, Bb & C is a major pentatonic. Our goal is simplicity today. Just take a second to think about what this means. It means that without having to learn anything extra on top of what you already did, you now have access to a major pentatonic in a different key. That's a lot for nothing. And in the major pentatonic we have both the 2nd & 6th scale degrees which means that we can hit the root note of any chord progressions involving the 2 or 6 chord which we couldn't do without bending in 1st position. They would have to be major key songs, and you don't have unbent access to the 4th scale degree for a 12 bar blues in this position like you did in 1st, but you can't have everything for nothing.

So the 3rd tip is to make use of 10th position with the 1 draw as the root note to play your major pentatonic solos. You might feel like suddendly there is twice as much information to absorb, but that is an illusion. It's the same stuff you already know, but with a different attitude, and with Harp Guru you can see that and know that it's true and good and everything is going to be ok.

And now that you know everything is going to be ok, there's just time for one bonus tip. You remember how we stopped playing the 2, 5 & 8 draws in 1 position to leave out the 5b, because sometimes you just don't want that full on bluesy sound. Well practicing that in 1st position is going to be really useful when you come to 10th position, because in 10th position that Gb is actually a 3b, which is most likely going to sound very bad in whatever major pentatonic context you put it in.

We go over the controls for Harp Guru in more detail in other videos, including how to change position and harp key with confidence so do be sure to check them out on the Harp Guru YouTube channel.

So there you have it, 4 tips for getting the most out of your PentaHarp with the least effort possible. Before we get on to the PentaHarp giveaway courtesy of Hohner and Sutherland trading, if you like what you have seen here then please do give us a thumbsup and a comment, it helps us out loads costs you nothing and is actually the competition entry requirements anyway. That's right, if you are alive anywhere in the world right now, all you have to do is give a thumbsup and a comment on this and / or any of the other giveaway videos all linked together in the description telling us what you think about the PentaHarp and / or this lesson. Comments & likes on all the videos definitely increases your chances of winning and the competition ends on January 15th so don't delay and keep an eye out for replies to your comments on the 15th to let you know you've won.

---------




In this video we'll see exactly what the PentaHarp is making possible for those with limited time to learn the harmonica, exactly what is so much simpler on a PentaHarp than on a regular Richter tuned harp and why, and then at the end I'll tell you how you can get your hands on a brand new PentaHarp courtesy of Hohner themselves and their generous UK distributers Sutherland Trading. This offer is open to all global participants but if you happen to win and live in one of the many regions where the PentaHarp is still not available then you'll have the only PentaHarp for miles around for weeks or even months before anyone else.

We're going to be using Harp Guru for this lesson. As a guitar player you might never have heard of Harp Guru, and you might have never seen even a non-interactive version
of the layout charts that Harp Guru has taken to the next level. But as a guitar player you probably do understand the power of visualisation so let's start with a quick
orientation of what we're' looking at.

Every hole on a harmonica has 2 reeds. A blow reed and a draw reed. Those reeds are represented here on the harpface as the cells inside this grey box. We have 10 holes on the
harmonica so we have 10 pairs of holes inside this grey box. So if you blow on hole 1 you will hear a C, and if you draw (which is what we call inhaling) then you will hear a D#, otherwise known as Eb. The notes above and below the grey box can only be played with special techniques called bending and overblowing. You'll soon be interested to know how to get the bends at least, but let's ignore them and the overblows (which are much harder) entirely. As a beginner harmonica player you'll want to know what you can do without these techniques. And there's a lot! So pay attention.

All harmonica's are tweaked to be particularly good at some things, and for the pentaharp this is making melodies, specifically melodies made with the pentatonic scales and the blues scale. That's not to say that you can't play chords or heptatonic scales too, but your low hanging fruit on the PentaHarp is minor pentatonic melodies, and there is nothing quite as direct and reliable as a pentatonic solo.

In Harp Guru we identify the notes of a scale by highlighting the relevant harp face cells in colour. So on hole 1 we can play the root note which is always green which is a C
by blowing, we can then play the flat 3 which is orange and plays an Eb by drawing on hole 1 as we saw before. If we repeat that blow draw pattern up one hole then we will
hear the 4th and then the 5b on hole2, and then up again 1 hole we will hear the 5th and the 7b on hole 3, and then that gives us all the notes of the blues scale. And, you can see this pattern repeats exactly the same in the next octave. So, simple & consistent breathing pattern means intuitive locating of the note you want to play, which means simple melody making.

In the Hohner official PentaHarp for guitarists video (link in the description) Payton Taylor & TJ Watson give a great account of their desire to *just be able to play in the box* to go along with the guitar they were playing and the frustration they felt with how unintuitive it is to do that on a regular Richter tuned harp.

Let's see exactly what they are talking about. This is a standard Richter tuned harmonica, playing the blues scale the way it most commonly is, and you can see immediately what they're problem is. The first thing you'll notice is that there is way more variance in breathing pattern. The breathing pattern you play in this octave is very different from the pattern you play in this octave. You can also see that there are other notes which you need to jump over. Some of these might sound fine, like the 2 or even the 6 depending on the context, but this 3 is probably isn't going to fit if you're in a minor context and the point is that these players just wanted that direct pentatonic sound with minimum effort. The pentaharp is giving us a much more regular pattern and "no wrong notes". For someone who just wants to let loose that's very helpful. The next thing is you can see how many of the notes of the blues scale fall outside the home row. That means that you need to be able to bend or overblow to play these notes. This is the *most common way* to play this scale on a standard harmonica. It's not easy. It has it's own benefits, but being easy is not one of them.

There is a deeper level of complexity in the Richter tuned harmonica too. You see how down here the blow reed is always lower than the draw reed (6 is lower than 7b, 1 is lower than 2), but up here the blow reed is *higher* than the draw reed (4 is higher than 3, 6 is higher than 5). That means that playing at the top of the harmonica is different in many ways to playing lower down. Notice down here we've got two identical notes right next to each other too. All of this stuff is the result of wonderful engineering, it's fascinating to understand and amazingly rich in what it can produce. But it's not easy!

So the pentaharp is making minor pentatonic and blues scales just about as easy as it's possible to make them. You still have to learn how to play single notes. That's the first job of any harmonica player. With the pentaharp you have the opportunity to stop right there and let your intuitions guide you.

This is the first in a 3 part series on the pentaharp. We're done talking about why it is the fastest way to start playing blues scale and minor pentatonic melodies

This is level 1, for guitarists mostly. There's no reason that you can't learn any other tuning of harmonica, but if you just want quick access to that minor pentatonic and blues scale sound to let rip then you can see that the pentaharp is going to give you intuitive and direct access as fast as possible.

Play single notes that's your first job as any kind of harmonica player. The level one draw of the pentaharp is that you can stop right there and play pentatonic solos in 3 octaves with just about as little effort investment in a harmoinca as you could ever hope for.

So if it sounds like that's what you need, or if you just like fee stuff then let's talk giveaways. Hohner and their uk distributor 

Learn where the root note is for the chord changes
