Getting comfortable with second position

This is 2nd position. Now this supposed to be our closest friend on the harmoniaca. It's usually the first position we're introduced to, rightly or wrongly, and it's the one that we're spending most of our time with. So why is it that people spend years practicing their scales and perfecting their techniques while in second position, and learning the second position songs of masters only to find that they feel just as uninspired and lost during improv as a beginner. Well clearly there's something missing in their relationship with 2nd position, and today I want to highlight some things that beginners and intermediates alike are commonly neglecting which can really take you from knowing things in second position, to just knowing second position full stop.

We're going to start at the beginning, but intermediates stick around, if you do follow us from the ground up you might be surprised how quickly you come to something new. This is all about shining a light on overlooked foundations.

To *start* playing in second position, *all* you need to do is use these holes as your root note, the 2draw, 3blow, 6blow and 9blow. A root note is the same thing as the key of the song you'll be playing in, so this is why when you are playing a song in G, in second position you need to use a C harp. You see this is a C harp, because the 1blow is C, and the notes on the 2draw, 3blow, 6blow and 9blow are G, meaning that when we use these as the root of the songs we play, we'll be playing in G.

And until you know how, it can be a little bit of a mystery as to how to know which harp to use for a given song or which song you'll be ready for with a given harp. Harp Guru can help you with that, where for any position, in this case 2nd, you can see all the harps which produce all the song keys in that position. So 2nd position on a G harp will produce a D, and if you want to play in C you will need an F harp.

Anyway, let's return to playing G on a C harp to keep things simple.

So now that you're happily droning along with a G, let me give you my first piece of advice; practice jumping around between these root notes. The root is the safest note you can hit, They will always sound great, even if you mess up a bit like you can hear me doing now. I know you can because I've already recorded and while I've got a long way to go in terms of technique, ask yourself, how creative can you be with just one note, and if it's not even as good as this then ask yourself whether it should be. Reducing your melodic options means you can really focus on rythm and texture, and if anyone tells you you can't be joyfully expressive without melody then they're wrong. Just ask a drummer.

Now apart from being a great shortcut in to meaningful improv, even for beginners, this exercise will give you the confidence that so many people lack to move up the harp later on. Many intermediates are still missing this skill so get a funky jam track on (I suggest a funky track with a predominanly rythmic exercise like this) and show them what you can do with just 3 identical notes. It's probably *as* interesting as what many can do with a whole scale at this point.

So now that we're happily *jumping* around on G, we'll soon want to be playing some other notes along with it, and often the first notes that we'll be interested in are the 4th and the 5th. The 5th in partiular is absolutely fundamental to almost every single musical structure you'll encounter, whether you know it or not, and while the 4th is also important the real reason I'm introducing them together here is because of their central role in the 12 bar blues.

If you've studied the structure of a 12 bar blues at all then you'll be familiar with the concept of the I chord, the IV chord and the V chord. Well these names are well chosen and easily mapped on to what we're looking at here. If we're playing a 12 bar blues in G, then the I chord will be G which means that our root note, (which you'll see represented here as a 1), will be G. And we know how to play that in 2nd position, don't we. So far so good? When the song changes to the IV chord, we temporarily have a new root note which will be the 4th scale degree of the I chord. The 4th scale degree of the I chord *is* the root note of the IV chord. That's why knowing where the 4th scale degree of second position is is useful. So if you want to drone on the 2draw during the I chord, you can drone on the 4blow during the IV chord to have the same effect. And for the same reason the 5th scale degree of the I chord is the root note of the V chord.

Now, you might be wondering, if we're moving to another root note on each chord change, does that mean we need to learn a new position for each of those root notes? Well, yes you can! But no you don't have to. Those other posisions would be 1st position and 3rd position as I'm showing here. Look at the location of the root notes, they are the same as the locations of the 4th and the 5th scale degrees in second position. 4th in 2nd position, is root in 1st position. 5th in 2nd position is root in 3rd position. But if that's confusing you, don't panic, theres no need to understand that just yet. Through the magic of music, what you learn in 2nd position alone will work over all the chord changes, but it's just very useful to at least know where the root notes of the chord changes are and how they relate to the I chord and what you're playing in 2nd position, even if you don't want to think about 1st and 3rd position alongside yet.

So that's the 1st, 4th and 5th and you'll notice, all very easily playable all the way up and down the harp so guess what I'm going to suggest next. Yes, learning to jump around between the roots and 5ths in particualr, is going to bring you so much confidence later on, and confidence right now for that matter. If you tried the previous exercise with just the root note and were surprised about the freedom of expression, and you can gradually get confident in the locations of all 11 of these holes, then you'll be amazed how suddenly you can feel orientated and expressive within a 12 bar jam track. Everything you've been hearing in the background now has taken place only on the root 4th and 5th, and it's just a section from a very long and enjoyable session with that limitation in place.

I'll be the first to admit that this is nowhere near clean or presentable as music, but that's not the point. The point is there's no prerehersed riffs here. Just me feeling like I want to go to a note, hearing what it should sound like, knowing where I need to go to play it, and then completely failing to hit it cleanly. But for me, that's just where I'm at for total unrehersed improv. And if you can hit these notes cleaner than me then that is great; but can you do the other bits too? Do you know where you are all the time and do you know where to jump to when you hear the note you want to play in your head? These are not just skills you have to wait years to acquire. You can target them too, you just have to know how.

We need to, and we will, discuss how you can build a good enough mental model of the location of these notes to do this. Harp Guru is very useful here, but it's not essential so stick around and we'll get to that soon, but what we've just seen means that improv is an option, even for real beginners as long as you've got a sense of rythm. And all you intermediates who find yourselves sounding repetative. Try simplifying your pallet a little bit and moving around with a bit more freedom. You might discover that you have blown past a lot of stuff which is the key to building real comfort. And this goes for *any* position.

So, what to introduce next? Well I think you get the idea that I think that playing around with small batches of notes is a great way to get confortable with them but I'll leave it to you to apply that to what comes next. I'll just say though that *whatever* you are doing, and whatever "bad" notes you hit in the process, there is nothing that can't be recovered from with a confident slide to a root or a 5th. Just saying it one more time. Ok and I'll move on.

A description of 2nd position would not be complete without talking about the 2 pentatonic scales. These are *the* sweet spot between safety and expressiveness. Just like the root and 5th alone, there is more expression here than you would think possible with 5 notes, and yet, every single one will always sound great, as long as you can get your major and minor right (but that's easy).

Now, learning the scales and becoming comfortable with their notes are very different tasks. There are lot's of lessons talking about the importance of being able to run through these scales smoothly, and that is absolutely something you should practice, but there are other angles to approach this from which I encourage you to consider. One of the problems with practicing running the scales up and down is that you can become tied to the scale. This is a very common complaint for musicians of all kinds that they can absolutely shred a scale, but they don't have any musicality. So practicing outside of the scale is important to help prevent this problem. Another issue, with the minor pentatonic, is that the flat 3 is missing past the lower register until you can perform and overblow on the 6hole and a reasonably challenging blow bend on the 10 hole. So a lot of students, me included, fall in to the trap of neglecting the higher registers, just because this one note is missing, and the reason is that when you're practicing a scale, it *does* sound uneasy to have a missing note in the scale, but for me that's just an argument to consider other methods of practice. So yes, my advice is to indeed practice the scales, but also make sure you are playing around with patterns in all the registers, and hang the flat3. Sure it's valuable, but it's not indespensible. You still have your safe notes in the root and the 5th, and the flat7 which is arguably just as spicy as the flat3 is really easy to play all over as long as you can double bend the 2 hole. And if you can't, well then just remember that you were making music with just 2 notes earlier so there's obviously lot's to be done with even just a few more.

So how else to practice these? Well to some degree just carry on doing what you were doing before. Just play the root and the 5th, along with the flat7. There's a hell of a lot you can do with just that and I'll recommend a latin jam track for this. Just have a go. Don't even think, just play those 3 notes and when the music throws down another level of energy, match it by sliding up to a higher flat7. It sounds amazing.

So that's simple enough in concept, but we learn quickly that it's difficult to keep in mind the destination of these jumps, as well as the inconsistent locations of the notes relative to each other on the harp as soon as we're dealing with, well more than one note across the octaves frankly. And that's where building a visual model of the locations and relationships comes in. I really recommend conciously trying to build up a mental model and a really useful tool for doing that can be to just have a chart in front of you when you are playing. You can find images of the harmonica layout on the internet for free, there's also some free interactive harmonica reference apps out there which can help here but by far the most helpful and clear is Harp Guru, but you've got to pay your 5 or $6 for Harp Guru so I've linked some of the best alternatives in the description for you to try out while you come round to the idea ;) 

So why is this so powerful? Well let's just imagine we're practicing the root 5th and flat7. Well you get this very clear spacial representation which is going to support your ability to recall where you need to jump to when you need to jump, and how to repeat a riff in a different octave when you want to do that. And this I think is really at the heart of a lot of peoples discomfort is that scales teach you how to move fluidly between neighboring notes, but melodies don't only involve neighboring notes, and if you've just started to build even a simple theme in the lower octave it requires an awareness of what we're seeing here to start thinking about how you can continue that theme in the higher register. So that's what having a chart in front of you can do, and the great thing is that rather than binding you to the chart, the more you use it, the more it becomes internalised. And then that's when you become free. And comfortable.

Now we could leave it there but I will show you one more feature which is unique to Harp Guru which can help turbo charge this process even further and that is the quiz mode. The quiz mode can challenge you on the location of scale degrees or notes and it can be limited to a certain set of questions so we can really target our knowledge on to the just the root 5th and flat7 for example by syncing with what we've been working with on the harp face and then entering quiz mode down here.

It takes mere hours to go from absolutely clueless to pretty good, and honestly when I'm improvising now I've got my eyes closed and I'm seeing these colours and the spacial relationships between them clearly now it's been an absolute game changer. I'm not the slickest player, but if you tell me to slide up to 6 in a few different positions now I can do it well. And if I play a riff in the lower octave I can repeat it in a higher octave. It's been a completely liberating experience and it only took me a couple of weeks to go through everything I've talked about here to finally feel comfortable in second position.

Now, disclaimer, I had already been playing harmonica for a year when I tried this so your experience might differ but you know, it's got to be worth a try hasn't it.

I've put a link to all the background jam tracks you've heard in the description, along with some of the resources you can try for building your mental model and if you'd like to give Harp Guru a go you can download it now for iOS and Android. Please do, it's very very good. And if you have any requests for video content, fire away, I am all ears. See you next time.


, in part because of it's use of colour and animation but also because it's really been designed with specific thought for  are also free or you can download Harp Guru which has the advantage that it's interactive and comes with all the features we're about to see, and more for that matter, just watch some of the other videos to discover what.

I don't believe that learning a scale really helps you replicate a riff in another octave.`

Learn shapes, use quiz mode to pracitce

Notice how you can learn shapes as well as locations here too

So what to introduce next? Well chord triads are at the heart of harmonisations so we should add a 3, or a flat 3. Well that's a decision isn't it, and oh no! if we've got a decision to make then that means we've got things we can get wrong. Well that's true, but I want to reassure you that this is just about the only thing that you can get really wrong in second position, I'm going to put this out there and say that if you do anything else by accident as a beginner you can just jump to a root or a 5th (as you've been practicing) and no-one's going to even notice that you did anyhing wrong.

If you are playing along to a 

And we can do a lot with these, but where would we be without a 3rd. Now what happens next is a branching point for 2nd position and if we deal with it nice and clearly here I think you might get a new perspective on all the 


is useful and the root note will be the root note of 2nd position, 

Double stops
Bends

We can see that there are 2 complete and 2 partial octaves.

Draw holes, especially those with bends on them are the most expressive holes on the harmonica, and many of the most characteristic sounds happen on holes

The tldr is that it is largely to do with the blues.
